Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. this is one
of the series of foundational lectures in
mathematics and we've been talking a lot about
basic definitions in geometry today we're going
to look at another important notion which often
is a source of confusion for undergraduates and
high school students it's the idea of a vector
what exactly is a vector well there are a number
of possible answers we could say that the vector
is a directed line segment and that captures very
nicely what it is that we have in mind we have in
mind a quantity which has both a direction and a
magnitude so here's a vector called V or a picture
of one and because it's a directed line segment we
do not mind if we translate it we still call that
the same vector so these two vectors over here
which are parallel to this one and have the same
length we consider them to be the same vectors
this will example here that's a vector which is
a different direction and has a different length
its name is W these are V so that's what kind of
a physical pictorial definition of a vector but we
will want one that's a little bit more concrete so
that we can specify exactly what it is that we're
talking about one approach is to say that is an
n-tuple well for us n is 2 because we're working
in two dimensions but you could also do this for
three or four dimensions so we just say that a
vector V is a ordered pair of numbers and we'll
see that that's also quite reasonable another idea
is to connect it with physical quantities that
are naturally in vector form things like force
velocity torque acceleration or even translation
these are all physical things that are naturally
represented by vectors and another approach is
to say that well a vector is really just like
a point because if we have our coordinate plane
here like this then here's a point and to that
point we can think of associating the vector that
goes from the origin to that point so there's a
natural identification between points and vectors
and sometimes very often these two notions are
confused it will be very important for us not
to confuse them points and vectors are separate
notions and that's a key insight into geometry
let's have a look at what actually we are going
to do we're gonna draw some inspiration from what
we did when we were doing arithmetic I remind you
that we started out discussing natural numbers 1
2 3 and at some point we wanted to introduce the
idea of an integer which in our minds included
not just the natural numbers 1 2 3 but also zero
minus 1 minus 2 minus 3 and so on now remind
you what we did what we did is we took pairs
of natural numbers m and n we wrote em less n
to represent the integer that we would usually
think of as M minus n we had a notion of equality
between these things so that M less n was equal
to K less L precisely when M plus L equals k
plus n so effectively what we did is we used
the differences between natural numbers to define
what an integer was or to put it another way an
integer was really a pair of natural numbers where
it was the difference between those two natural
numbers that encoded the integer so that's a
lot like what we're going to do with vectors
here's our official definition of what a vector
is a vector is an ordered pair a B of points so
it's a pair of points first one called a and
a second one called B and our notation for it
having a little arrow on top of the pair a B
now along with this definition you will won't
be surprised to hear that there's a notion of
equality we have to say when two vectors are
the same or equal so let's say that we have
points a 1 a 2 a 3 a 4 with all this with the
same kind of notation here that a 1 equals x 1 y
1 and a 2 equals x 2 y 2 and so on then we'll say
that the vector a 1 a 2 equals the vector a 3 a 4
precisely when these two relations are satisfied
when X 2 minus X 1 that's the difference between
the x coordinates of these two equals X 4 minus
X 3 the difference between the x coordinates of
these two and when y 2 minus y 1 the difference
between the Y coordinates here equals y 4 minus
y 3 the difference of the Y coordinates here in
pictorial terms will say that this vector a 1 a
2 is equal to a 3 a 4 when the change in X from
X 2 to X 1 here is the same as the change in
X from here a 4 to a 3 and when the change in
Y from here to here is the same as a change in
Y from here to here that ensures that it's the
relationship between these two points that defines
or captures the vector and I give us a new type
of mathematical object which will denote by vector
that's a vector it's not a point it's not a number
it's not a circle it's a new type of mathematical
object let's have a look at an example or two so
here's our usual grid plane with x axis x y axis
here and I've got a point a 1 with coordinates
1 1 and a point a 2 with coordinates 3 4 then
those two points determine a vector let's call
it V written a1 a2 and physically we think vectors
being the directed line segment from a1 to a2 if
we wanted to write it out officially we'd write
a1 there a 2 there with a vector sign on top of
them now this is a cumbersome notation and our
notion of equality that we defined last time
shows us that it's only the difference between
the x-coordinates and the difference in the
y-coordinates that really matters so we introduce
a new type of notation for this vector we record
it by the difference in the x-coordinates the
final minus the initial x-coordinate and the
difference in the y-coordinates the final minus
initial y-coordinate and we put those two numbers
inside a round brackets that's different from
square brackets so square brackets represent
points round brackets now represent vectors
this is a very nice notation that keeps these
two ideas separate here's another example of the
same vector at the point a3 with coordinates for
to the point a 4 with coordinates 6 5 then a
vector associated to them is also 2 3 so again
when we emphasize that vectors and points are a
different type of objects now at the University
of New South Wales where I teach I often teach
linear algebra and unfortunately our students
are often confused about the difference between a
point and a vector because we essentially use the
same notation for both it's unfortunate and it
would be preferable if everybody used something
like this notation square brackets 4 points round
brackets 4 vectors so that you can instantly see
that there are different types of objects they
also are quite different arithmetic Li because
there's things that we can do with vectors that
we can't do with points for example we can add two
vectors here's the vector 2 3 here is a vector 2
minus 4 if we this vector on the page and then we
translate the second vector so that its tail is at
the head of the first vector then that cumulative
path determines another third vector the one from
here to here so we add the two vectors to three
plus two minus four just by adding the components
in a similar way we can multiply a vector by a
scalar or a number so when we say three times the
vector 2 minus four that would be a vector which
is in the same direction but just three times
as long so vector arithmetic is very natural
and important and next time we're going to use
it to introduce some other geometrical objects
including parallelograms I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening